# 5G

5G is the fifth generation of mobile networks and a successor to 4G. It was first launched in 2019. For the most part, the appeal of 5G comes down to the dramatically faster connection speed compared to the previous generations. While now 5G operates alongside 4G, eventually, the goal is for it to fully replace the previous technology standard. However, that probably will not happen in the near future.
Since the 1970s, cellular networks have evolved over a number of generations, starting from 1G, which was launched in Japan in 1979. It provided only voice traffic, which could easily be intercepted due to the lack of encryption. The second generation, 2G was launched in 1991. It used the available spectrum of radio frequencies more efficiently than 1G and supported text messages. The data driven 3G was introduced in the early 2000s, and the information transfer rate offered by it was 200 kilobits per second (Kbps). However, the standard data rate for 3G has never been formally set, so the data speeds tend to vary from 384 Kbps to 168 megabits per second (Mbps). In 2008, the first commercial 4G mobile networks were launched, followed by the faster 4G LTE (fourth generation long-term evolution) two years later. As opposed to 3G, the minimum standards for 4G have been defined. They included peak data rates of around 100 Mbps for high mobility (such as moving vehicles) and around 1 gigabit per second (Gbps) for low mobility (such as walking). These standards, however, were only met by the more advanced versions of 4G, LTE Advanced and LTE Advanced Pro, which can offer speeds exceeding 3 Gbps with the latency (response time) of less than two milliseconds.

## 5G architecture
In general, in wireless communications systems, radio frequencies are used to transfer information over some distance without the use of wires. That can be used for services such as wireless access to the internet, cellular telephony, and wireless home networking. The main reason why 5G is so much faster than its precursors is the fact that its signals partially operate over radio frequencies that were not used in the previous generations. Wireless service providers use several different spectrum bands in order to deliver 5G services. Since radio frequencies are a limited resource, a combination of low-band, mid-band, and high-band spectrum is used in 5G. These are:

<ul>
 <li>Low-band spectrum (<1 GHz)</li>
 <li>Mid-band spectrum (1-6 GHz)</li>
 <li>High-band spectrum (24-40 GHz)</li>
</ul>

The low-band spectrum has been used in the early wireless networks and in all the later generations of wireless cellular technology. The range of the low-band spectrum is relatively long, which means that the signal can travel through large distances – a receiver can be far away from a tower and still be able to get signal. Because of that, the sub-1 GHz spectrum is essential for sparsely populated areas – one tower can serve people within hundreds of square miles. Also, the low-band radio frequencies enable the signal to go through walls and windows more easily. However, there is a drawback – the connection speeds typically are significantly slower than those in the other types of 5G, which operate on higher radio frequencies. Low-band 5G is just slightly faster than 4G LTE, with its speed usually being around 100 Mbps.

The mid-band spectrum (1 GHz - 6 GHz range) is considered to be ideal for 5G, as it can simultaneously travel large distances and transfer big amounts of data. According to the GSM Association, the frequency range between 3.3 GHz and 3.8 GHz is the best for 5G due to the fact that in many countries, it has been specifically designated for it. 2G and 3G operated in frequencies below 2.6 GHz.

The high-band spectrum is also called the millimetre wave spectrum. In contrast to the low-band spectrum, the signals in this range cannot travel far (in some instances, they will not travel more than one mile), and obstacles such as trees, buildings, or even glass can block the signal. However, the massive advantage of this spectrum is that the connection speed can be as high as 3 Gbps (or even higher) if the signal is not encumbered. It can be especially useful for things that require ultra high connection speed and very low latency. To sum up, the signal can travel faster in lower frequencies, but in higher frequencies, it can carry more data. What is unique about 5G is that there is no one-size-fits-all approach, as different applications require large amounts of data, large distances for data to travel, or a combination thereof. Because of that, in order to satisfy the users’ needs, the 5G architecture is designed to support all the above-mentioned frequency ranges.
Compared to the previous generations, the 5G architecture is quite complex. The 5G System has three main components – the 5G core network, the 5G access network, and the user equipment (UE). In the 5G core, a cloud-aligned service-based architecture is used in order to deal with tasks that require the complicated interconnection of network functions, such as authentication or the aggregation of traffic from connected devices. The 4G architecture is relatively simple – user equipment (for example, a smartphone) connects over the LTE Radio Access Network (E-UTRAN) to the Evolved Packet Core and then further to some external network (such as the Internet). Meanwhile, the Evolved NodeB (eNodeB) hardware sets apart the user data traffic from the network’s management data traffic and then feeds both of them separately into the EPC. In contrast to the appliance-based architecture of 4G, in the 5G architecture, the network functions are split up by service, which is why it is called the 5G core Service-Based Architecture (SBA).

There, the user equipment connects through the 5G New Radio Access Network to the 5G core and then further to data networks, such as the internet. This might seem similar to the 4G architecture, but there is a lot more going on “behind the scenes”. The Access and Mobility Management Function (AMF) is a single-entry point for the connection with the UE, and on the basis of the requested service, it chooses the respective Session Management Function (SMF) to manage the session. The User Plane Function (UPF) carries the IP data traffic (user plane) between the UE and the external networks, and the Authentication Server Function (AUSF) lets the AMF authenticate the UE and access the 5G core services. The whole process is supported by the other functions, such as the Policy Control Function (PCF), the Application Function (AF), and the Unified Data Management (UDM).

As for the Radio Access Network of 5G, it comprises several facility types, such as towers, masts, small cells, and dedicated home systems. Due to the short range of the millimetre wave spectrum, small cells are particularly important 5G. The name of the base station used for 5G is gNodeB (gNB), while eNodeB (eNB) is used for 4G. The 5G base stations can be either standalone (SA) or non-standalone (NSA). The SA 5G base stations are based on new standards, and they are connected directly to the 5G core network, while the NSA 5G base stations are built on the existing 4G infrastructure and depend on its network. Therefore, in order for the full 5G experience to be provided, a SA 5G system needs to be deployed.

## 5G technologies
One of the technologies used in 5G is massive MIMO. MIMO (multiple-input, multiple-output) is a radio antenna technology that has been in use for some time in numerous modern wireless technologies, such as LTE and Wi-Fi. The MIMO technology requires installing a combination of antennas at the transmitter and receiver in order to increase the throughput and improve the radio link. As part of the technology, the techniques of spatial diversity and spatial multiplexing are used to transmit the data signal that is independent and separately encoded with the same time period and frequency. The massive MIMO technology, an extension of the MIMO technology, involves an even bigger number of antennas being installed on the base station. While the overall size of the 5G massive MIMO antennas is similar to the ones used in 4G, the antenna elements are smaller, which can allow one physical case to fit more than 100 elements. A related term is beamforming, a technology that works alongside the massive MIMO technology, which uses advanced signal processing algorithms to steer the wireless signal in a specific direction that ensures it will reach the user. To sum up, the benefit of the massive MIMO technology is that more users can connect to the network at the same time and still have high throughput.
Another technology used in 5G is network functions virtualization (NFV). It refers to network functions changing from previously running on dedicated hardware, such as firewalls, routers, and load balancers, to operating on software on a virtual machine. Thanks to NFV, there is no need to buy expensive hardware elements anymore. Also, the technology can result in the acceleration of installation times. NFV is complemented by network slicing, another key component of 5G. This technology makes it possible to create multiple virtual networks (“slices”) on top of a shared physical infrastructure. That allows for the customisation of the virtual networks to fulfil the requirements of particular devices, services, or operators. For example, applications that require low latency can use the “slice” that prioritises it. That can be particularly beneficial for applications that leverage different aspects of 5G, such as smart cars or machine-to-machine communications.

